Add release notes for 0.57.0 (#3560)
microsoft/typespec: docs/release-notes/release-2024-06-10.md

---
title: 0.57 - June 2024
---

:::warning
This release contains deprecations
:::

## Values In TypeSpec

Decorators often expect some sort of configuration to be passed as an argument. In version `0.51.0` we introduced the `valueof` keyword to constrain a decorator or template parameter to be a value, however this was limited to string, numeric and boolean values.

> When dealing with more complex decorators or free form data one had to use a model type to represent the data. This required a lot of manual validation in the decorator implementation and introduce a lot of potential issues(Passing a subtype like a union instead of a model)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When dealing with more complex decorators or free form data, one had to use a model type to represent the data. Unfortunately, this approach was difficult for decorator authors to handle reliably and required somewhat sophisticated validation to avoid some common pitfalls that couldn't be prevented through type system constraints.
```

> In this release we introduce a whole new world to TypeSpec, values. This include new syntax for declaring object and array values, scalar constructors, `const`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this release we introduce a new concept to TypeSpec: values. This includes new syntax for declaring object and array values, scalar constructors, and `const` declarations.
```

Reviewer: values could link to the docs, perhaps?

### Object values

Object values can be declared with the `#{}` syntax.

```tsp
const user = #{ name: "Bob", age: 48, address: #{ city: "London" } };
```

### Array values

Array values can be declared with the `#[]` syntax.

```tsp
const users = #["Bob", "Frank"];
```

### `const`

> Const are the value world equivalent of `alias` but also allows you to specify a type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Const declares a variable that holds a value, and can optionally specify a type.
```

I'm not sure the alias comparison is super important to call out here.

```tsp
const name = "Bob";
const name: string = "Bob";
```

### Scalar constructors

> Scalars also needs to be able to define values. For scalars that don't extend a base type like `string`, `number` or `boolean` which have literal syntax you can define a constructor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Scalars can define custom values with scalar value constructors. Scalars which don't extend a base type like `string`, `number` or `boolean` can define a constructor.
```

  } = #{ name: "System" };
}
```

- [#3022](https://github.com/microsoft/typespec/pull/3022) Decorator API: Legacy marshalling logic

With the introduction of values, the decorator marshalling behavior has changed in some cases. This behavior is opt-in by setting the `valueMarshalling` package flag to `"new"`, but will be the default behavior in future versions. It is strongly recommended to adopt this new behavior as soon as possible.

Example:

```tsp
extern dec multipleOf(target: numeric | Reflection.ModelProperty, value: valueof numeric);
```

Will now emit a deprecated warning because `value` is of type `valueof string` which would marshall to `Numeric` under the new logic but as `number` previously.

To opt-in you can add the following to your library js/ts files.

```ts
export const $flags = definePackageFlags({
  decoratorArgMarshalling: "new",
});
```

## Features

### @typespec/compiler

- [#3280](https://github.com/microsoft/typespec/pull/3280) Support completion for Model with extended properties

  Example

  ```tsp
  model Device {
    name: string;
    description: string;
  }

  model Phone extends Device {
    ┆
  } | [name]
    | [description]
  ```

> - [#3280](https://github.com/microsoft/typespec/pull/3280) Support completion for object values and model expression properties.

Reviewer: Given we are shipping values here, I don't think we need this?

Author: Well this applies to model too not just object values

- [#3022](https://github.com/microsoft/typespec/pull/3022) Add syntax for declaring values. [See docs](https://typespec.io/docs/language-basics/values).

Object and array values

```tsp
@dummy(#{
  name: "John",
  age: 48,
  address: #{ city: "London" }
  aliases: #["Bob", "Frank"]
})
```

Scalar constructors

```tsp
scalar utcDateTime {
  init fromISO(value: string);
}

model DateRange {
  minDate: utcDateTime = utcDateTime.fromISO("2024-02-15T18:36:03Z");
}
```

- [#3527](https://github.com/microsoft/typespec/pull/3527) Add support for `@prop` doc comment tag to describe model properties
- [#3460](https://github.com/microsoft/typespec/pull/3460) Hide deprecated items from completion list
- [#3462](https://github.com/microsoft/typespec/pull/3462) Linter `all` rulesets is automatically created if not explicitly provided
- [#3533](https://github.com/microsoft/typespec/pull/3533) More logs and traces are added for diagnostic and troubleshooting in TypeSpec language server
- [#3422](https://github.com/microsoft/typespec/pull/3422) Formatter: Indent or dedent multiline strings to the current indentation

### @typespec/http

> - [#3342](https://github.com/microsoft/typespec/pull/3342) Add new multipart handling. Using `@multipartBody` with `HttpPart<Type, Options>`. See [multipart docs] for more information https://typespec.io/docs/next/libraries/http/multipart

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#3342](https://github.com/microsoft/typespec/pull/3342) Add new multipart handling. Using `@multipartBody` with `HttpPart<Type, Options>`. See [multipart docs](https://typespec.io/docs/next/libraries/http/multipart) for more information.
```
